# Statistical-learning-and-the-development-of-knowledge-systems

## Abstract
- Human knowledge of the world is often organized into systems of inter-related, multi-level, relational structures (e.g., language, symbolic numbers, physical systems). A perennial question has been how these knowledge systems are learned during development, or if they are indeed learnable at all, as opposed to constrained by prior, innately specified biases. Going beyond individual patterns (e.g., learning novel countable nouns or transitive verbs) and toy examples (e.g., learning ABA, AAB patterns) examined in the laboratory, in the current study, we trace the development of one knowledge system—how multi-digit symbolic numbers are named and how they are used to represent discrete quantities—during the preschool and kindergarten period (3- to 6-year-olds). Using a corpus data analysis approach, we combined several datasets from 678 children who contributed 13039 individual responses in two different tasks (i.e., identifying a named multi-digit number between two, or choosing a numerically larger number between two). Combining traditional statistical analyses methods, recursive partitioning machine learning algorithms and network analysis, we show how learning starts out with piecemeal knowledge and good enough solutions (as opposed to be guided by clean rules or biases), but gradually make connections among the various individual regularities and integrate them into a coherent knowledge system. Results have implications on the development of knowledge systems and school teaching of symbol systems.

## Participants and tasks
- 544 three- to six-year-olds contributed data to this analysis. They have participated in various different studies that all aimed at investigating early multi-digit number knowledge. Each children have contributed various numbers of trials that range from xx to xxx. Two tasks were used. In the which-N task, children selected a named number when given two written numbers. In the which-More task, children select the numerically larger numbers when given two written number. 323 children has completed both tasks, while the remaining 221 have only completed one task. There are a total of 867 completed tasks and 13039 completed trials. 

For the particular items used in each tasks, see Table 1 (add link). 

## Analytic approaches
- **Analysis 1**: provides basic descriptive statistics concerning children's performance in this two tasks.
- **Analysis 2**: uses decision tree algorithm to uncover the structure of children's knowledge.
- **Analysis 3**: uses network analysis to investigate how individual pieces of knowledge are gradually integrated into a coherent knowledge system. 

## Data source files
- [data_n_raw_wide.csv](Data/data_n_raw_wide.csv) contains 404 children's responses to the which-N task
- [data_more_raw_wide.csv](Data/data_more_raw_wide.csv) contains 465 children's responses to the which-More task

- [data_n_item.csv](Data/data_n_item.csv) characterize each of the xx which-N items along 6 feature dimensions: xxx. 

## Code/analysis files
- [Data cleaning.md](Markdown/Data-cleaning.md) This code cleans the raw N and More participants data:

1. convert data from wide to long format
2. delete NA items
3. create a separate subj level accuracy column and use it to categorize children into 4 quartiles
4. adding item feature information
5. output the results into new csv files for further analysis 

It also identifies children who had completed both tasks, by concatenating their "DOB, DOE, and location" and find common values both the n and more data.

- [Analysis 1_Overall descriptive results.md](Markdown/Analysis 1_Overall descriptive results.Rmd) 
This code provides an overall view of children's performance in the two tasks. 

- [Analysis 2_Decision trees_N.md](Markdown/Analysis 2_Decision trees_N.md)
This code generate decision trees for the N task.

- [Analysis 2_CHAID trees_N_M.md](Markdown/Data-cleaning.md) This code grows CHAID trees for the N and More tasks. This is to verify that the trees generated by the ctree function are correct.  

**Output files**: 

- [Analysis 2_Decision trees_stats_N.md](Markdown/Analysis 2_Decision trees_stats_N.md) This code compute all of the stats for each split of the decision trees.   

- [Analysis-3_Network-analysis_N.md](Markdown/Analysis-3_Network-analysis_N.md)
This code generates network graphs for the which-N and more tasks. It also 1) compare and plot the global centrality measures of the N and More task, and 2) plot the degree of the individual nodes in the N and More networks. (Probably should seperately the second use in a different file)

## To do...

* Analysis 1: THe effect of some features (i.e., length_diff, transpostion)
* Analysis 1: school plot generate y axis labels
* Analysis 1: Re-organize plots, using code?
* In the final analysis (Analysis 6), we focus on children who contributed to both tasks and examine how the two tasks grown in tandem using within-subjects data.